An Experiment on Optimal Campaigning Using a Simplified Seven State
Electoral College\*

Bernard Grofman

Jonathan Cervas

University of California, Irvine

April 22 , 2020

\*Grofman is Distinguished Professor of Political Science and Jack W.
Peltason Endowed Chair at the University of California, Irvine. Cervas
is a graduate student in the Political Science program at UCI. The
participation of both authors in this project was supported by the
Peltason Chair.

ABSTRACT

We consider campaign strategies for two candidate competition in an
experiment based on simplified seven state electoral college game, with
states having different seat weights ranging from 3 to 55, with 70 seats
needed for a majority. The game requires participant to play the role of
a presidential candidate and to allocate campaign resources (100 million
dollars to be allocated in units of one million) across the seven states
in what they view as an optimal manner. **In the simplest version of the
game**, each state is assumed to be a battleground state and whichever
participant spends more in the state will win all of the state’s
electoral college votes. We examine the formal properties of this and
related games. For example, we prove that the game we use in the
experiment has no *majority rule core*, i.e., no dominant campaign
investment strategy. Using experimental data on this game, we examine
how voters judge a state’s importance for generating an electoral
college victory. Here we distinguish between a state’s share of
electoral college seats, on the one hand, and the likelihood that the
state will be pivotal in the electoral college game, on the other. To
measure the latter, we calculate the state’s *Banzhaf* power score. Such
scores have been shown to be linked to optimal strategies in some
weighted voting games (Duffy and Matros, 2015 JONATHAN IS THIS THE
CORRECT CITE?). The weights in our game have been carefully chosen to
allow a comparison between these two potential measures of a state’s
importance in that three states have different weights but the same
*Banzhaf s*core of .038, and two of the other four states have different
weights but also the same *Banzhaf* score of .154 . **We find that,
across all respondents, results tend to be intermediate between Banzhaf
scores for each state (normed to 100%) and the state’s EC vote share.
JONATHAN THINK ABOUT WORDING**

# **Introduction**

Americans do not directly elect the president of the United States, the
electors in the Electoral College (EC) do. Each state has a number of
electoral votes equal to the state's number of U.S. senators and
representatives—Montana has 3, New York has 29, Texas has 38, and the
largest state in population, California, has 55. Washington, DC, is the
only non-state with electoral votes; it gets three. There are 538
electoral votes total, and you need 270 to win. When a presidential
candidate wins the popular vote in a state, he or she gets all of that
state's electoral votes—except in Maine and Nebraska, where allocations
are by congressional districts with a 2 EC bonus for the candidate
winning the plurality of the state’s votes.

There is a huge literature about the Electoral College. Some of it
models the likelihood of divergence between the Electoral College
outcome and the popular vote (Merrill, 1978; Grofman, Brunell, Campagna,
1997; Merrill, 2012), some of it looks at candidate incentives for
campaigning in different states as function of the state’s Electoral
College seat share and as a function of the state’s level of
competitiveness (Shaw 1999a,b; 2006; Abramowitz 2001; Grofman and Feld,
2005; Gimpel, Kaufmann, and Pearson-Merkowitz. 2007; Stromberg, 2008;
Fair 2009; Shaw and Althaus, **2017)** but most of it focuses on the
arguments pro and con about the need to eliminate the Electoral College
and debates the desirability of various presidential election mechanisms
that have been proposed to replace it, including the option of a
directly elected president (see e.g., Edwards, 2011; Ross, 2012).[1]

The work we present here is most relevant to the second of these issues.
We have created a two-candidate campaign game with a mini-electoral
college -- one with seven states rather than fifty. States have
different seat weights ranging from 3 to 55, with 70 seats needed for a
majority. **As our test of the protocol**, we have run in-class
experiments in which students play this game in pairs, with each taking
the role of the candidate of one of the parties. In the game, candidates
must simultaneously choose allocations of their full campaign resources
across the states, with each having 100 million dollars (to be allocated
in units of one million) across the seven states in what they view as an
optimal manner. In the initial version of the game, each state is
assumed to be a battleground state, and whichever participant spends
more in the state will win all of the state’s electoral college votes.
We treat this as a one-shot game, but in some experiments the
participants played the game twice – the second time against a different
opponent. **JONATHAN IS THIS RIGHT? I CAN’T REMEMBER**. We provide in
the Appendix a Beta version of the protocol we used for this game when
it is was played live in the classroom. **JONATHAN THE PROTOCoL AT THE
END IS A SLIGHTLY IMPROVED VERSION OF WHAT WAS ACTUALLY USED**

We are most interested in using this experimental data to learn how
ordinary citizens make strategic judgments about a state’s importance
for generating an electoral college victory – judgments reflected in
their level of investment of campaign funds in the state. In particular,
even in the game where the only information players have to shape
campaign resource allocation decision is the EC seat share in the state,
we can distinguish between a state’s share of electoral college seats,
on the one hand, and the likelihood that the state will be pivotal in
the electoral college game, on the other. To measure the latter, we
calculate the state’s *Banzhaf* power score.[2] Such scores have been
shown to be linked to optimal strategies in some weighted voting games
(Duffy and Matros, 2015 **JONATHAN IS THIS THE CORRECT CITE?).** The
weights in our seven state game have been carefully chosen to allow a
comparison between these two potential measures of a state’s importance
in that three states have different weights but the same *Banzhaf s*core
of .038, and two of the other four states have different weights but
also the same *Banzhaf* score of .154 .

Banzhaf scores are calculated by creating the set of possible coalitions
(Banzhaf, 1967; Felsenthal and Machover, 1998) . We can represent a win
for Party A in any given state as a one and a win for Party B as a zero,
so that there will be 2<sup>7</sup> feasible coalitions, which we can
write in binary order. Then we can identify which of the coalitions in
this set that are winning for Party A (B); these will be losing for
Party B (A), and vice versa. Then we can look separately at each of the
states that are contributing to the winning coalition. By symmetry we
only need to look at the winning coalitions for one of the parties, say
Party A. Now we ask for each winning coalition whether a switch in a
state in that winning coalition for party A that went for Party A will
change the outcome for Party A from winning to losing if we change the
outcome in that single state. If so we tally a one for that state. This
is an indicator of the state’s pivotality. We do the same for all the
states in that winning coalition and then for all the winning
coalitions. Then we count up the total times each state has been
pivotal, and the sum of those pivotality totals across the seven states.
Then we normalize each state’s pivotality score by the total to obtain
the *normalized Banzhaf score*. We show in Table 1 weights and
*normalized Banzhaf scores* for our seven state game.

Table 1. Weights and Banzhaf scores in the Seven State Electoral College
Game

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>State</strong></th>
<th><strong>EC Votes</strong></th>
<th><strong>Banzhaf Power</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>A</strong></td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0.038</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>B</strong></td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0.038</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>C</strong></td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0.038</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>D</strong></td>
<td>13</td>
<td>0.115</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>E</strong></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>0.154</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>F</strong></td>
<td>34</td>
<td>0.154</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>G</strong></td>
<td>55</td>
<td>0.462</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Because we will show later that there is no equilibrium strategy in this
game, we seek to predict the <u>average</u> allocation of resources. We
hypothesize:

HYPOTHSIS 1. In the EC game, the resource allocations across all
participants will be well predicted by the states’s (normalized)
*Banzhaf power score* , and this prediction will be as good or better as
a prediction based on the state’s actual EC share.

However, before we examine the data we have generated from our
experiments we first turn to an explication of the formal properties of
the seven voter game and to related issues about weighted voting games
in general.

# **Formal Properties of Weighted Voting Games**

The Electoral College can be regarded as an instance of the more general
class of what mathematicians refer to as a *weighted voting game.*
(Owen, 1995). We can characterize such a game by a set of weights
together with is called a *quota*, a threshold q such that a proposal
that wins that much or more support carries and one that falls below
*quota* q, fails to pass. **Here we will limit ourselves to games in
which q is a simple majority of the weights.** The set of weights need
not be unique. In general, any two weighted voting games that have the
same set of minimal winning coalitions are regarded as equivalent. A
*minimum winning coalition* (*mwc*) is a set of voters or units such
that the sum of their weight is greater than or equal to quota, but the
elimination of any member of the set brings the sum of the weight of the
remaining members below quota. In other words, a *minimum winning
coalition* is one such the loss of any single member will turn the
coalition from winning to losing. There has been a lot of work by
mathematicians on the structure of weighted voting games.[3] One
important concept in understanding the properties of any weighted voting
game is the *Nakamura number*.

> DEFINITION. The *Nakamura number*, *N* is the cardinality of the
> smallest set of minimum winning coalitions with the property that the
> intersection of its members is empty (Nakamura 1979; Schofield 1984a;
> see also Schofield, Grofman and Feld, 1988).

Since this definition is not at all obvious, an example will help. [4]

> EXAMPLE 1. Consider the five-voter game (6;1, 1, 2, 3, 4), where 6 is
> the number of votes needed to win (a.k.a. the *quota*) and the other
> five numbers represent the weights of the five players. Label the
> players A, B, C, D, and E in the order of their weights, from lowest
> to highest. The *minimal winning coalitions* (*mwc*s) are E + D, E +
> C, E + B + A, D + C+ B, and D + C+ B. Thus, any two minimal winning
> coalitions have at least one member in common, that is, their
> intersection is nonempty.[5] If, however, we consider the coalitions
> {E,D}, {E,C} and {D,C,B}, these three have an empty intersection. With
> three minimal winning coalitions we can get a nonempty intersection,
> but with two coalitions the intersection is non-empty. Hence the
> *Nakamura number* for this example is 3.

The *Nakamura number*, *N*, tells us something very important about
whether or not there is a dominant strategy in the game.

THEOREM 1. If *N* ≥ W + 2 then the core is nonempty when the
dimensionality of political competition is W.

PROOF. See Schofield (1984a).

If we think about a campaign game where the units of contention are of
unequal value and the winner is the one who captures units that sum to a
majority of the contested resources, a very important set of questions
has to do with the strategic incentives in such a game. For example, can
we expect that, in a two player game, if each player allocates resources
across the units seeking to win (or in some versions of this game,
destroy) the unit, is there an optimum strategy for each player and, if
there is, is it what game theorists refer to as a *pure strategy* or
does it necessarily have a probabilistic *(mixed strategy*) feature?
Games such as this are studied under the rubric of *Colonel Blotto
games* (**CITES NEEED**). We can adapt information about the EC game we
glean from the *Nakamura number* of that game to the campaign context.

In particular, if *N* = 3, then there exists an equilibrium set of
strategies (a *majority rule core* to the game) only if W=1, i.e., only
if the space of political competition is one-dimensional. For that to
happen, the only feasible winning coalitions must be ones that are
*connected* wrt that single dimension. A coalition (here a set of
states) is *connected* with respect to a given dimension if, whenever
there are two states, say P and Z, in the coalition then all states with
value on the given dimension that lie between the value of P and the
value of Z are also in the coalition.

COROLLARY TO THEOREM 1. In a simple two person Electoral College
campaign game where the two players are allocating resources to the
states if

1.  the winner of the state is the candidate who has allocated more
    resources to that state,

2.  the two players have equal resources to allocate to their campaign,

3.  each state begins the pre-campaign period with a 50% chance of
    electing each candidate, and

4.  the *Nakamura number*, *N*, of the Electoral College game equals 3,

then there exists no dominant strategy in the game unless

1.  there is a way to order the set of states along a line, i.e., along
    a single dimension, so that every *mwc* in the game is connected
    with respect to that one dimension.

Under the conditions (a) –(d) above, unless condition (e) is also
satisfied, for any allocation proposed by one of the players there
exists an allocation that the other player can propose that will lead to
that second player winning the game.

It is easy to see that condition (e) cannot be satisfied for Example 1.
Since one *mwc* is {E, D}, E and D must be adjacent on the line for the
coalition to be connected; but, by similar reasoning, E and C must be
adjacent on the line. Thus, D and C must be located on opposite sides of
E, and each must be adjacent to E. But {E, B, A} is also a minimum
winning coalition. But then, either A or B must be adjacent to E for
that coalition to be connected. However, we have already identified two
other states that must be adjacent to E, so that we have a
contradiction. Hence, condition (e) is violated and the game has no
dominant campaign strategy. *q.e.d.*

> EXAMPLE 2. The seven state EC game we have used for our experiment can
> be characterized as the game: (40; 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55), where we
> label the states from A to G ordered from lowest EC weight to highest
> EC weight. We list below the minimum winning coalitions for this game:
>
> G + F = 89
>
> G + E = 76
>
> G + D + C = 76
>
> G + D + B = 73
>
> G + D + A = 71
>
> F + E + D + C = 76
>
> F + E + D + B = 76
>
> F + E + D + A = 76

If we think about overlap then it is easy to see that every set of two
*mwc*s has at least one member in common, but, for example, the set of
three coalitions consisting of {G, F}, {G, D, C} and { F, E, D, C} have
zero overlap, so, in this example the *Nakamura number* is again 3.

However, as was the case for Example 1, there is no way to order the
states along a single dimension so that every *mwc* is connected. G must
be adjacent to E and to F, but as we look at the third listed *mwc* we
see that G must also be adjacent to either D or A, but that is
impossible.[6]

# **Data Analysis**

We have run XXX games involving XXX participants in XX different class
settings at our home university in classes taught by one of the authors.
**JONATHAN FILL IN** We show the results in Table 2. **JONATHAN IS THIS
THE MOST RECENT DATATABLE?**

**Table 2. Distribution of Campaign Results in the Seven State Electoral
College Game**

<img src="./attachments/myfilename/media/image1.tiff"
style="width:6.4375in;height:5.84028in" />

As we see from Table 2, **across all respondents, Banzhaf scores for
each state (normed to 100%) do in fact do a good job of predicting the
<u>average</u> proportion of resources allocated to the state – as we
had hypothesized. However, so do actual EC weights. Moreover, the
observed distribution of allocations is most often in-between the two.
JONATHAN, think about wording . I don’t think we have enough data to be
really sure!**

# **Future Research**

**JONATHAN THE STUFF BELOW CONTAINS MY CURRENT IDEAS FOR MORE COMPLEX
EXPERIMENTS THAT DON’T REQUIRE FOLKS TO PLAY THE GAME MORE THAN ONCE.
THERE IS A HUGE LITERATURE ON LEARNING IN GAMES, BUT THAT IS NOT A ROUTE
WE WANT TO GO IMMEDIATELY SINCE THE KINDS OF ANALYSES THAT ARE THE
INDUSTRY STANDARD FOR LEARNING MODELS ARE PRETTY SOPHISTICATED .**

**It would be highly desirable to replace the assumption that all states
were *tabula rasa*, i.e., with an equal pre-campaign likelihood of
voting for either party, with a more realistic version with built-in
asymmetries. In particular, we could assign each state an *a priori*
expected vote share for party A. In that future version of the game,
players are instructed that the party with the initial advantage will
win the state unless the other party outspends then by at least k
million dollars, where k is the first party’s vote margin. JONATHAN
THINK ABOUT WORDING. In such experimental games we may imagine a two
dimensional structure of political competition such that each state can
be characterized by its EC weight, on the one hand, and its (positive or
negative) vote margin on the other. This structure allows us far more
realism with respect to the conditions surrounding actual Electoral
College campaigning (see e.g., Shaw, 2006) .**[7]

**In one possible variant of such an expanded two-dimensional EC game,
the vote margins are chosen so that neither party has an apparent net
advantage with respect to that dimension of party competition in that
for each state with a margin k\* there is another state with a margin
-k\* and a state where k = 0. JONATHAN THINK ABOUT Of course, this type
of symmetry in margins does not prevent asymmetry in *a priori* seat
share and thus asymmetry in expected winner. However, in another
possible variant of the asymmetric game, the sum of the product of the
EC seat and margin of advantage is set to zero, so that we again have an
a prior expectation of a 50-50 outcome, but now one where we also have
*a priori* expectations of which states will be won by each party.
JONATHAN THINK ABOUT. In other versions of the game we might allow for
both kinds of asymmetry. JONATHAN THINK ABOUT** **When we impose
asymmetries on the payoff /reward for investment structure we believe
that sometimes such asymmetries will allow us to provide more exact
predictions about expected candidate investments (cf. Stromberg, 2008)
than is the case for the seven state example we used for our present
experiments, but that is an issue for future research.**

APPENDIX

Instruction for In-class Game for Seven State Electoral College

Imagine that there are seven states in the Notusistan Electoral College
used for its presidential elections. Each is designated with a capital
letter below. Notusistan’s Electoral College operates under the same
“winner take all” weighted voting rules as in the U.S. Electoral
College.[8] The weight of a state is the number of seats allocated to it
in the Notusistan Electoral College The seven states have weights as
follows:

A 3

B 5

C 8

D 13

E 21

F 34

G 55

There is a two candidate contest for the presidency of Notusistan, and
you are one of the candidates. You have 100 million Notusistan dollars
in campaign resources to be distributed across the seven states in the
country. Any state in which you spend more than your opponent you will
win. You may only spend money in one million dollar amounts. If there is
a spending tie, that state’s electoral college votes will be divided
equally between the two of you. YOU WANT TO WIN!! To win, since there
are 139 seats in the Notusistan electoral college, you will need to win
states totaling at least 70 Electoral College seats.

Report your proposed spending in each state as a percentage of your
total spending to the right of the state’s electoral college votes
above. Remember, your total spending is capped at 100 million dollars
(in units of one million dollars) and so the allocations to the states
should sum to 100%. (You may assume that your campaign opponent has the
same amount of money to spend that you do.)

In class you will pair up and play the game. You will play multiple
games against different opponents to determine who can spend his or her
money most effectively.

REFERENCES NEED TO BE COMPLETED and cleaned up

Brams Steven J. and Morton D. Davis. 1974. The 3/2's Rule in
Presidential Campaigning. <u>American Political Science Review</u>
68(1):113-134.

Duffy, John, and Margit Tavits. 2008. Beliefs and Voting Decisions: A
Test of the Pivotal Voter Model. American Journal of Political Science
52 (3):603–18.

Duffy John and Alexander Matros. 2015. Stochastic asymmetric Blotto
games: Some new results.  Economics Letters 134: 4–8.

Edwards, George C. III. 2011. Why the Electoral College Is Bad for
America, 2nd Edition. Yale University Press.

Gimpel, James G., Karen M. Kaufmann, and Shanna Pearson-Merkowitz. 2007.
"Battleground States Versus Blackout States: The Behavioral Implications
of Modern Presidential Campaigns." The Journal of Politics 69(3):
786-97.

Grofman, Bernard, Thomas Brunell, Janet Campagna. 1997. Distinguishing
between the effects of swing ratio and bias on outcomes in the U.S.
electoral college, 1900-1992. <u>Electoral Studies</u>, 16(4):471-487.

Grofman, Bernard and Scott Feld. 2005.  Thinking About the Political
Impacts of the Electoral College. <u>Public Choice</u>, 123: 1-18.

Owen, Guillermo, Ines Lindner and Bernard Grofman. 2008. Modified Power
Indices for Indirect Voting. In Braham, Matthew and Frank Steffen (Eds.)
[Power, Freedom, and
Voting](http://www.amazon.com/Power-Freedom-Voting-Matthew-Braham/dp/3540733817/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1203702424&sr=8-2)<u>.</u>
Berlin: SpringerVerlag, 119-138.

[Felsenthal](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=0Y0CkhcAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=sra),
Daniel M, and Moshe Machover. 1998 [The Measurement of Voting
Power](https://ideas.repec.org/b/elg/eebook/1489.html). New York:
Springer.

Ross, Tara.  2012. Enlightened Democracy: The Case for the Electoral
College, 2nd Edition.  World Ahead Publishing.

Schofield, Norman. 1984. BG FILL IN

Shaw, Daron R. 1999a. “The Effect of TV Ads and Candidate Appearances on
Statewide Presidential Votes, 1988-96.” American Political Science
Review, Vol. 93 (2): 345-361

Shaw, Daron R. 1999b. “The Methods behind the Madness: Presidential
Electoral College Strategies, 1988-1996.” The Journal of Politics. Vol
61 (4), 893-913.

Shaw, Daron R. 2006. The Race to 270. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Shaw, Daron, and Scott Althaus. 2017. Forthcoming need updating.
Electoral College Strategies of American Presidential Campaigns from
1952 to 2012.

Strömberg, David.  2008. “How the Electoral College Influences Campaigns
and Policy: The Probability of Being Florida.” American Economic Review
2008, 98 (3), 769–807.

Owen, Guillermo. 1995. Game Theory. **FILL IN**

Wright, John R. 2009. “Pivotal States in the Electoral College,
1880-2004.” Public Choice, 139 (1): 21-37.

Zingher, Joshua. 2016 **TBA**

[1] Often opponents of the Electoral College also review the historical
record to make the points that (1) the reasons why the EC was created no
longer seem relevant, and that (2) in any case, the institution now
operates in a fashion undreamt of by the founding fathers.

[2] *Banzhaf scores* are not the only way to assess pivotality (see e.g.
Wright, 2009). **JONATHAN I/WE WILL NEED TO REREAD THIS.**

[3] For a useful overview see Felsenthal and Machover (1998:). As
Schofield, Grofman and Feld (1988: 202, with internal cites omitted)
observe: “Weighted voting games are a much more general concept than
they might first appear. Almost all multitiered representation systems
with veto power or veto power with override that are in common use can
be re-expressed as weighted voting games. For example, in the UN
Security Council, the Big Five (U.S., USSR, Great Britain, France,
China) have only one vote apiece but they also have veto power (a
negative vote cast by any of them defeats any motion); the 10 other
members of the Security Council have 1 vote, and, absent a veto, 9 of 15
votes are needed for passage. This voting situation can be re-expressed
in weighted-voting terms as (39;7,7,7,7,7,1,1,1,1,1,1,l,l,1,1). Note
that we now have a 39/45<sup>ths</sup> q.”

[4] We take this example of how to calculate a *Nakamura number* from
Schofield, Grofman and Feld (1988). In this example, we have reversed
the order in which weights were labeled from what is found in this
article. Doing so, of course, does not affect the properties of the
game.

[5] Such games are said to be *proper.*

[6] The only way we could avoid the lack of one-dimensionality is by
ruling out (by fiat) some of the *mwc*s identified above. For example,
we could array the states with respect to their EC seat share and
require that the only admissible coalitions were those involving sets of
states that have were adjacent to one another in terms of their EC seat
share. This would mean that one coalition would have to consist of the
larger states and the other coalition would have to consist of the
smaller states. While ideologically connected cabinet coalitions are
common in European multi-party democracies (**BG FILL IN CITE**) in the
U.S. the notion that <u>all</u> the largest states would be won by one
presidential candidate and <u>all</u> the smaller states by the other
presidential candidate is not plausible. For example, in 2016, a number
of the larger states went for Trump.

[7] Brams and Davis (1974) are sharply critiqued by Colantoni, Ordeshook
and Levesque ( XXXX) for only looking at EC weights and not also at the
competitiveness level of the state, making the obvious point that if
makes no sense not to take into account the likelihood that one’s
resource investments might actually change the outcome in the state. See
also discussions in Grofman and Feld (2005) and Stromberg (2008).

[8] In the U.S., there are two states that do not use a winner take all
rule, Maine and Nebraska, but there are no such states in Notusistan.
